welcome back everyone part four and our
CHP special 10-year anniversary program
I appreciate you all coming back did you
know you could donate to this worthy
cause I've been relentlessly committed
to since 2010 that's right
help keep this thing going for another
ten years all you got to do is go to
patreon.com/scishow
you when you alone will receive for me
your humblest of narrators consistently
voted one of the top 10 China history
podcast shows in the Apple charts
patreon.com slash China history podcast
you can also always throw me a few
zlotys over at PayPal dot me slash China
history podcast if you know patreon
ain't your thing okay Showtime
I left you hangin last episode with the
big meeting about to take place dr.
Henry Kissinger President Nixon's
national security adviser and special
envoy he was on a mission impossible to
meet with Joe and I to work out a few
things discuss issues of mutual concerns
start working on a communique that both
sides would ink their names to later on
and start preparing for the visit to
China of President Nixon we pulled the
plug on the PRC all those years ago
all discussed in a number of past CHP
episodes Joe offered the hand of
friendship in 1954 in Geneva but the
deal breaker was that communism thing in
those days we don't rather cozied up to
a big ol lump of polonium before we
talked to any communists and now after
all these years the United States and
China represented by these two men well
they had some catching up to do and a
ton of frayed loose ends to attend to it
had been left up to Kissinger's team to
prepare all the briefing papers and
compile all the information required
that their boss might need during the
course of the discussions famously there
were multiple binders of papers compiled
that Kissinger's team carried with them
into the meeting and when Joe sat down
with Kissinger well he had remarked on
so many of these big thick
black binders stuffed with all the
Kissinger's briefing papers on China
painstakingly researched and compiled by
Lord Holdrege Schmeiser before Joe
placed on the table in front of him was
just a single sheet of paper with some
handwritten notes he didn't need any
briefing books he'd been here before and
he was very clear and what he had to say
Joe open by saying something to the
extent then it's an old Chinese custom
to always allow guests speak first and
on that note the meeting commenced after
the minute or so at chitchat Kissinger
went right at it in this episode I'm
gonna let a number of excerpts from the
transcript speak for themselves some of
these words still have meaning today
with the current state of affairs in
addition to excerpts from the meeting
I'll also quote from Henry Kissinger
strip recap to Nixon about the specifics
of the meeting and his general
impressions as far as the reason for
being there Kissinger uttered these
words that more or less still ring true
in this critical hour when he said to
the premier of China quote we realize of
course that there are deep ideological
differences between us you are dedicated
to the belief that your concepts will
prevail we have our convictions about
the future the essential question for
our relations is whether both countries
are willing to let history judge who was
correct while in the interval we
cooperate on matters of mutual concern
on a basis of mutual respect and
equality and for the benefit of all
mankind mr. premier I see two principal
purposes for our meeting today and
tomorrow
first as Chairman Mao and you have
suggested we should work out
satisfactory understandings concerning a
visit to China by President Nixon a
visit he intends to make and to which he
looks forward secondly to make President
Nixon's visit the success we want it to
be we should lay the groundwork by
discussing issues between us our mutual
concerns for Asia and the peace of the
world end quote
with Taiwan being the paramount issue
some ground rules about each side's
position on Taiwan were made and which
I'll go into detail later Taiwan was the
matter most important to China but to
the United States
it was the second issue which mattered
most and this was Vietnam Kissinger
broached this subject and saying quote I
wanted to take the liberty of discussing
Indochina with you we know your
principles and your friendships we
believe that the time to make peace has
come for the sake of the people of
Indochina for the sake of peace and Asia
and for the sake of peace in the world I
can assure you that we want to end the
war in Vietnam through negotiations and
that we are prepared to set a date for
the withdrawal of all our forces from
Vietnam and Indochina as you suggested
before but we want a settlement that is
consistent with our honor in our
self-respect and if we cannot get this
then the war will continue with the
consequences of which you yourself have
described and which may again despite
our interests interrupt the improvement
in our relations
I know Hanoi is very suspicious and they
are afraid to lose at the conference
table what they have fought for on the
battlefield and sometimes I am frank to
say that I have the impression that they
are more afraid of being deceived than
of being defeated they think that they
were deceived in 1954 but I want to say
that we are realists we know that after
a peace is made we will be 10,000 miles
away and they will still be here end
quote their discussions at one point
meander down the path of the nature of
the Vietnamese people Joe and Lai
mentioned something interesting
referring to the hypogeum the drone
sisters of ancient times I mentioned
them in that past six-part series from
early 2018 on the history of China
Vietnam relations when remarking on the
heroism of the Vietnamese people Jo had
said quote they are a great and heroic
and admirable people 2,000 years ago
China committed aggression against them
and China was defeated it was defeated
by two ladies to women generals
and when I went to Vietnam as a
representative of new China for a visit
to North Vietnam I went personally to
the graves of these two women generals
and left wreaths and flowers on the
graves to pay my respects for these two
heroines
who had defeated our ancestors who were
exploiters end quote
Kissinger had replied quote even though
they are now our enemies we consider
them an heroic and a great people whose
independence we want to preserve there
are two obstacles now to rapid
settlement the two are the following one
North Vietnam in effect demands that we
overthrow the present government in
Saigon as a condition of making peace
secondly they refused to agree to a
ceasefire throughout Indochina while we
withdraw I would like to tell the Prime
Minister on behalf of President Nixon as
solemnly as I can that first of all we
are prepared to withdraw completely from
Indochina and give a fixed date if there
is a ceasefire and release of our
prisoners secondly we will permit the
political solution of South Vietnam to
evolve and to leave it to the Vietnamese
alone we will not reenter Vietnam and
will abide by the political process end
quote
jo replied quote our attitude toward the
Vietnam question and toward a solution
of the question of Indochina is composed
of the following two points the first
point is that all foreign troops of the
United States and the troops of other
countries which followed the United
States into Indochina should be
withdrawn the second point is that the
peoples of the three countries of
Indochina should be left alone to decide
their own respective fates end quote
- which Kissinger replied quote we agree
with both points end quote
progress was already being made Jo
pressed further quote does the US agree
to withdraw all its military forces from
Indochina including the army the Navy
the Air Force and the Marines as well as
its advisors and its military
installations because that was the
loophole in the Geneva agreements the
war flared up from the man
of military advisors and quote for such
a thorny issue and was looking like the
US and China agreed on more than they
disagreed on and that a solution would
be possible the first day of discussions
lasted well into the evening concluding
at 11:20 p.m. there was very little
sizzle and lots of steak Taiwan Vietnam
Japan Korea India all these hot topics
were touched on again some of the
specifics I will mention when I get to
kissinger's trip recap memo that he
presented to Nixon upon his return to
the States just after noon the next day
they met at the Great Hall of the People
the same team from the day before on the
China side assembled Joanne lie Yeji yin
yang Huang hua Jiang wen Jin and other
interpreters and assistants with regard
to the matter of Taiwan and the future
of normalization of relations Jo and I
wanted to reiterate the points discuss
the other day these words would come to
be very familiar and needed to be
included in any u.s. statement quote it
must be recognized that the government
of the People's Republic of China is the
sole legitimate government representing
the Chinese people it must be recognized
that Taiwan belongs to China that it is
an inalienable part of China which was
returned to China after World War two
that as you mentioned yesterday the u.s.
does not support a to China's or one
China one Taiwan policy and does not
support the so-called Taiwan
independence movement and quote Jo
thought the US was still gonna try and
kick this can down the road apiece
despite agreeing on the main points
regarding Taiwan and PRC recognition he
didn't want to offer even one angstrom
of wiggle room on this most key issue
for China jo pressed further quote if
all these questions should be left to a
later period to be solved but wouldn't
the intermediate period be one of
tension and if none of these issues
were resolved during your presidents
visit that what would be the result of
the visit not only the people in our
country but the people of the world
would ask us this question and ask you
that question if the president's visit
is decided and confirmed there should be
efforts to move in this direction of
course we do not set that as a
precondition for the president's visit
but we believe that there must be a
certain direction of efforts as a result
of the visit because we have always
viewed the question of Taiwan is our
internal affair which we must solve
ourselves and if these questions are
just hung up then the tension that has
existed between our two sides will
continue to remain end quote
the old veteran of a thousand
negotiations premier Joe and I used this
meeting to circle back and review all
the points Henry Kissinger had made the
day before especially with regard to the
big subjects Taiwan Indochina Japan and
the Southeast Asian subcontinent every
point raised by Kissinger was addressed
by Joe with his encyclopedic knowledge
of the history much of which he had
actively participated in Joe let no
stone remain unturned and sought
clarification of almost everything
Kissinger had said the visit of Nixon
was also discussed at length after
exchanging Frank views the two sides
hashed out a joint statement on the
upcoming visit of Nixon to China Joe
felt it was important that it be spun in
a way that clearly indicated the visit
was all Nixon's idea
Kissinger pushed back on that and they
agreed it would be said that both
leaders mutually expressed a desire to
hold a summit he wasn't gonna fall for
that one they agreed to hold this
historic meeting before May of the
following year 1972 after the requisite
back-and-forth both sides came to an
agreement on the wording of the
announcement they would make the
announcement read quote premier Joe and
Lai and dr. Henry Kissinger President
Nixon's assistant for national security
affairs held talks in Beijing from July
9th to July 11th
71 knowing of President Nixon's
expressed desire to visit the People's
Republic of China premier Jo and ly on
behalf of the government of the People's
Republic of China has extended an
invitation to President Nixon to visit
China at an appropriate date before May
1972 President Nixon has accepted this
invitation with pleasure the meeting
between the leaders of China and the
United States is to seek the
normalization of relations between the
two countries and also to exchange views
on questions of concern to both sides
end quote
then with the secret trip behind him
Kissinger left Beijing and snuck back
into Pakistan he flew to the US and met
with Nixon at a San Clemente home on
July 13th 1971 Kissinger had prepared a
memo to President Nixon dated July 14
1971 it detailed all of the points
discussed in Beijing over the past two
days of talks along with Kissinger
comments let me read a few excerpts from
this memo that had as its subject my
talks with Jo and ly he began quote my
two-day visit to Beijing resulted in the
most searching sweeping and significant
discussions I have ever had in
government I spent 17 hours in meetings
and informal conversation with Jo Enlai
flanked by Marshall yet yin yang member
of the Politburo and of the Military
Commission and Wang hua the new Chinese
ambassador in Ottawa these meetings
brought about a summit between you and
Malta a dome covered all major issues
between our two countries at
considerable length and with great
candor and may well have marked a major
new departure in international relations
it is extremely difficult to capture in
a memorandum the essence of this
experience simply giving you a
straightforward account of the
highlights of our talks potentially
momentous as they were would do violence
to an event so shaped by the atmosphere
and the ebb and flow of our encounter or
to the Chinese behavior so dependent on
new
and style thus this memorandum will
sketch the overall sequence of events
and philosophic framework as well as the
substance of our exchanges for the
intangibles are crucial and we must
understand them if we are to take
advantage of the opportunities we now
have deal effectively with these tough
idealistic fanatical single-minded and
remarkable people and thus transform the
very framework of global relationships
end quote
in his memo dr. Kissinger laid out the
details of the two days here he
describes the moment premier Joe and Lai
made his entree quote he came at 4:30
p.m. at our first encounter like the
entire visit
he was matter-of-fact urbane and totally
at ease without any of the
self-conscious sense of hierarchy of
Soviet officials after a few minutes of
ice breaking small talk and an official
photograph we moved to a conference
table and launched into 3 hours and 20
minutes of discussions I gave the
substance of the opening statement you
had approved considerably truncated to
get to the point quickly laying out a
possible agenda which we in fact took up
point by point in our meetings the
summit Taiwan Indochina relations with
major countries such as Japan and the
Soviet Union South Asia future American
Chinese communications arms control and
any other topics of interest to the
Chinese he immediately moved to their
fundamental concern Taiwan and I
rejoined with our position on Indochina
before lunch Joe made a 1 and 1/2 hour
presentation as always without notes
responding to each of the seven points
on my original agenda this was an
extremely tough presentation though put
forward without rhetorical flourish the
preoccupation with Taiwan the support
for the North Vietnamese the specter of
big power collusion specifically are
being carved up by the u.s. USSR and
Japan the contempt of the Indians hatred
for the Russians
I responded very toughly pointing out
that they had raised the issue of a
presidential visit and that we could not
accept any conditions that would not
raise the issue again they had to decide
whether to issue an invitation and then
launched into a deliberately brusque
point-by-point rebuttal of Joe's
presentation Joe stopped me at the first
point saying the duck would get cold if
we do not eat first
at lunch the mood changed and Joe's
geniality returned I gathered the
impression that his speech had been
largely for the record at the end of
lunch Joe launched into a moving account
of the Cultural Revolution which he
continued to relate
even after I noted that this was China's
internal affair one could tell that the
Revolution was an anguishing period for
him he described China's torn between
its fear of bureaucracy and the excesses
of revolution with each side claiming to
speak for Mao until the acknowledged
excesses threatened to destroy the
fruits of some 50 years of struggle and
quote and as for Joe and Lai the man
Kissinger had this to say quote Joe and
Lai epitomized these qualities he spoke
with an almost mater effect clarity and
eloquence he was equally at home in
philosophic Sweeps historical analysis
tactical probing light repartee his
command of facts and in particular his
knowledge of American events was
remarkable
he insisted on admitting faults in their
society and protesting that their lavish
hospitality was only quote what they
should do
there was little wasted motion either in
his words or his movements both
reflected the brooding inner tension of
a man concerned both with the
revolutionary fire of the next
generation and the massive daily problem
caring for 750 million people one who
endured the tribulations of the long
march and was now inviting the President
of the United States to visit his
capital Joe was also genial and urbane
with a refreshing sense of humor he
displayed an easy a Galit arianism
with his interpreters who had a free
though respectful relationship with him
or with all of our party who he
consistently ushered into and out of
elevators in front of him and he was
considerate in his genuine concern when
what if my colleagues wasn't feeling
well
in short Joanne Lai ranks with Charles
DeGaulle as the most impressive foreign
Statesman I have met and quote Kissinger
gave Nixon the bottom line on the summit
quote I can only account for the fits
and starts and the drafting of the joint
communique by attributing them to a deep
conflict between ideological and
practical considerations on the Chinese
side ideologically the concept of
Chairman Mao sitting down with the
leader of what they call the imperialist
camp must be extremely difficult for
some Chinese to accept
despite the prospect of its moving
forward their campaign against Taiwan on
the other hand I believe they are deeply
worried about the Soviet threat to their
national integrity realistically
speaking and see in us a balancing force
against the USSR and unlikely as it may
superficially seem I sense that they
actually do appreciate the balancing
role we play in Asia nevertheless it is
hard for lifelong revolutionaries to act
against their own principles and we must
be exceptionally careful not to drive
them away the Chinese will undoubtedly
stress the Taiwan issue as the key to
normalization of relations but we can
maintain that all issues of mutual
concern will be discussed for the sake
of Asian and world peace and all other
issues Jo in effect left all the other
basic principles up to you giving us
precisely what you wished a visit of up
to five days probably one other city
besides Beijing he mentioned Mao might
be outside the capital for more quiet
talks with you minimum Secret Service I
really don't think security will be any
problem they said security is the
responsibility of the host country
the PRC will not invite other US
political leaders before your visit I
emphasized it was important that our new
departure and
relations start at your level and not be
muddled by eager politicians in advance
this would not rule out newsman and
cultural exchanges in the interim end
quote as he anticipated at the outset
there was going to have to be one more
follow-up meeting to discuss specifics
but this historic initial meeting
it didn't reap too shabby of a harvest
here are some of the basic points
regarding Taiwan Kissinger explained to
Nixon that Jo had insisted that the u.s.
quote recognized that Taiwan is an
inalienable part of China and a province
of China recognized the PRC as the sole
legitimate government of China and
withdraw all its armed forces and
military installations from the area of
Taiwan and the Taiwan Straits within a
limited period and consider that the
u.s. ROC mutual defense treaty is
invalid I responded that the Chinese
were going beyond what they had said to
us and their messages and in the two
1970 Warsaw talks in which they had
requested the removal of our military
presence only I said that we had to
distinguish between what could be done
immediately and what had to be left to
historical evolution with respect to
military presence there were two
components to our forces on Taiwan those
related to the defense of Southeast Asia
especially Vietnam and those related to
the defense of Taiwan the former could
be withdrawn after the end of the war in
Vietnam the latter would depend on the
general state of our relations with the
PRC end quote Kissinger further said
quote on the political future of Taiwan
I said we did not advocate a to China's
or a won China won Taiwan solution but
would accept any political evolution
agreed to by the parties we hope that
this evolution would be peaceful and joe
said the PRC would try to keep it so end
quote
Kissinger also in his memorandum to
Nixon gave full details of China's
position with regard to Indochina
something that Nixon obviously had great
learn about all Nixon was hoping for was
that China meaning Joe and Lai would use
their relationship with the North
Vietnamese to see if any influence could
be used to help put an end to this
conflict in this respect Kissinger was
able to assure Nixon that Joe said he
would do his best okay let's put the old
proverbial bookmark in right here
because we're starting to run long the
nice people here at Abbey Road Studios
only gave me half an hour here in studio
number two to record this podcast so I
gotta cut it short
we'll pick up next time in part five and
continue on with Kissinger's debriefing
of Nixon following the big secret visit
of July 1971 do come back for that
until that time ladies and gentlemen's
this is Laszlo Montgomery all hunkered
down here in LA I only took my mask off
to record this episode and once again
I'm assuring you to come back next time
for another exciting episode of a China
history podcast